\documentclass[a4paper]{article}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \ifxetex
    \usepackage{mathspec}
  \else
    \usepackage{fontspec}
  \fi
  \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=MatchLowercase}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{%
\usepackage{microtype}
\UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\hypersetup{unicode=true,
            pdftitle={Verified, shared, modular, and provenance based research communication with the Dat protocol},
            pdfauthor={Chris HJ Hartgerink},
            pdfborder={0 0 0},
            breaklinks=true}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls
\usepackage{color}
\usepackage{fancyvrb}
\newcommand{\VerbBar}{|}
\newcommand{\VERB}{\Verb[commandchars=\\\{\}]}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Highlighting}{Verbatim}{commandchars=\\\{\}}
% Add ',fontsize=\small' for more characters per line
\usepackage{framed}
\definecolor{shadecolor}{RGB}{248,248,248}
\newenvironment{Shaded}{\begin{snugshade}}{\end{snugshade}}
\newcommand{\AlertTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.94,0.16,0.16}{#1}}
\newcommand{\AnnotationTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.56,0.35,0.01}{\textbf{\textit{#1}}}}
\newcommand{\AttributeTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.77,0.63,0.00}{#1}}
\newcommand{\BaseNTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.00,0.00,0.81}{#1}}
\newcommand{\BuiltInTok}[1]{#1}
\newcommand{\CharTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.31,0.60,0.02}{#1}}
\newcommand{\CommentTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.56,0.35,0.01}{\textit{#1}}}
\newcommand{\CommentVarTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.56,0.35,0.01}{\textbf{\textit{#1}}}}
\newcommand{\ConstantTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.00,0.00,0.00}{#1}}
\newcommand{\ControlFlowTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.13,0.29,0.53}{\textbf{#1}}}
\newcommand{\DataTypeTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.13,0.29,0.53}{#1}}
\newcommand{\DecValTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.00,0.00,0.81}{#1}}
\newcommand{\DocumentationTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.56,0.35,0.01}{\textbf{\textit{#1}}}}
\newcommand{\ErrorTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.64,0.00,0.00}{\textbf{#1}}}
\newcommand{\ExtensionTok}[1]{#1}
\newcommand{\FloatTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.00,0.00,0.81}{#1}}
\newcommand{\FunctionTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.00,0.00,0.00}{#1}}
\newcommand{\ImportTok}[1]{#1}
\newcommand{\InformationTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.56,0.35,0.01}{\textbf{\textit{#1}}}}
\newcommand{\KeywordTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.13,0.29,0.53}{\textbf{#1}}}
\newcommand{\NormalTok}[1]{#1}
\newcommand{\OperatorTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.81,0.36,0.00}{\textbf{#1}}}
\newcommand{\OtherTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.56,0.35,0.01}{#1}}
\newcommand{\PreprocessorTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.56,0.35,0.01}{\textit{#1}}}
\newcommand{\RegionMarkerTok}[1]{#1}
\newcommand{\SpecialCharTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.00,0.00,0.00}{#1}}
\newcommand{\SpecialStringTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.31,0.60,0.02}{#1}}
\newcommand{\StringTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.31,0.60,0.02}{#1}}
\newcommand{\VariableTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.00,0.00,0.00}{#1}}
\newcommand{\VerbatimStringTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.31,0.60,0.02}{#1}}
\newcommand{\WarningTok}[1]{\textcolor[rgb]{0.56,0.35,0.01}{\textbf{\textit{#1}}}}
\usepackage{graphicx,grffile}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
\IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
\usepackage{parskip}
}{% else
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{0}
% Redefines (sub)paragraphs to behave more like sections
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
\let\oldparagraph\paragraph
\renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
\let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
\renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi

%%% Use protect on footnotes to avoid problems with footnotes in titles
\let\rmarkdownfootnote\footnote%
\def\footnote{\protect\rmarkdownfootnote}

%%% Change title format to be more compact
\usepackage{titling}

% Create subtitle command for use in maketitle
\newcommand{\subtitle}[1]{
  \posttitle{
    \begin{center}\large#1\end{center}
    }
}

\setlength{\droptitle}{-2em}

  \title{Verified, shared, modular, and provenance based research communication
with the Dat protocol}
    \pretitle{\vspace{\droptitle}\centering\huge}
  \posttitle{\par}
    \author{Chris HJ Hartgerink}
    \preauthor{\centering\large\emph}
  \postauthor{\par}
    \date{}
    \predate{}\postdate{}
  

\begin{document}
\maketitle

\textbf{Content available under
\href{https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode}{CC 0
Public Domain Dedication}, unless otherwise noted}

\hypertarget{abstract}{%
\section{Abstract}\label{abstract}}

A scholarly communication system needs to register, distribute, certify,
archive, and incentivize knowledge. The current article-based system
technically fulfills these functions, but suboptimally. I propose a
module-based communication infrastructure that attempts to take a wider
view of these functions and optimize the fulfillment of the five
functions of scholarly communication. Scholarly modules are
conceptualized as the constituent parts of a research process as
determined by a researcher. These can be text, but also code, data, and
any other relevant piece of information. The chronology of these modules
is registered by iteratively linking to each other, creating a
provenance record of parent- and child modules (and a network of
modules). These scholarly modules are linked to scholarly profiles,
creating a network of profiles, and a network of profiles and their
constituent modules. All these scholarly modules would be communicated
on the new peer-to-peer Web protocol Dat
(\href{https://datproject.org}{datproject.org}), which provides a
decentralized register that is immutable, facilitates greater content
integrity through verification, and is open by design. Open by design
would also allow diversity in the way content is consumed, discovered,
and evaluated to arise. This initial proposal needs to be refined and
developed further based on technical developments of the Dat protocol
and its implementations, and discussions within the scholarly community
to evaluate the qualities claimed here. Nonetheless, a minimal prototype
is available today and this is technically feasible.

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

In scholarly research, communication needs to be thorough and
parsimonious in logging the order of various research steps, while at
the same time being functional in seeking- and distributing knowledge.
Roosendaal and Geurts proposed that any scholarly communication system
needs to serve as a (1) registration-, (2) certification-, (3)
awareness-, and (4) archival system (Roosendaal and Geurts 1998). Sompel
and colleagues added that it also needs to serve as an (5) incentive
system (Sompel et al. 2004).

How the functions of scholarly communication are conceptualized and
implemented directly impact (the effectiveness of) scholarly research.
For example, an incentive system might be present where number of
publications or publication outlet is more important than the quality of
the publications (Brembs 2018). In a narrow sense, this scholarly
communication system serves the fifth function of providing an incentive
system. In a wider sense, it undermines the goal of scholarly research,
which scholarly communication is a part of, and therefore does not serve
its purpose.

Narrow conceptualizations of the functions of a scholarly communication
system can be identified in the current article-based system.
Registration occurs for published works, but registration is incomplete
due to selective publication (e.g., 1 out of 2 registered clinical
trials gets published; Easterbrook et al. 1991) making research highly
inefficient (Assen et al. 2014). Certification occurs through peer
review (Sompel 2006) but peer review is confounded by a set of human
biases at the reporting- and evaluation stages (e.g., methods are
evaluated as of higher quality when they result in statistically
significant results than when in statistically nonsignificant results;
Mahoney 1977). Awareness occurs, but increasingly so for only those
researchers with the financial means to access or make accessible.
Restrictions on the sharing of scholarly information hampers discovery
and widespread dissemination. Content is archived, but is centralized
(i.e., failure prone), separated from the main dissemination
infrastructure, and not available until an arbitrary trigger event
occurs (i.e., a dark archive; Kiefer 2015).

The scholarly paper seems an anachronistic form of communication in
light of how we now know it undermines the functions its supposed to
serve. When no alternative communication form was feasible (i.e., before
the Internet and the Web), the scholarly paper was a reasonable and
balanced form for communication. However, already in 1998, seven years
after the first Web browser was released, researchers associated with
the scholarly publisher Elsevier suggested to make changes to the way
scholars communicate scholarly research (Kircz 1998). More specifically,
they suggested to change the communication to a more modular form, which
would help iterate research more frequently and increase feedback
moments (high speed of feedback was essential to for example Nature's
rise during the early twentieth century; Baldwin 2015). Throughout the
years, others also suggested various perspectives on modularity (Priem
and Hemminger 2012; Kuhn et al. 2016) and suggested micro- and
nanopublications (Kuhn et al. 2016; Clark, Ciccarese, and Goble 2014).

Modular scholarly outputs, each a separate step in the research process,
could supplement the scholarly article (as detailed in Chris Hartgerink
and Zelst 2018). Scholarly textbooks (i.e., vademecum science; Fleck
1981) communicate findings with few details and a high degree of
certainty; scholarly articles present relatively more details and less
certainty than textbooks, but still lack the detail to reproduce
results. This lack of detail is multiplied by the increasingly complex
research pipelines due to technological changes and the size of data
processed. Moreover, textbooks and articles construct narratives across
findings because they report far after events have happened. Scholarly
modules could serve as a base for scholarly articles, reporting more
details, less certainty of findings, and where events are reported
closer to their occurrence. Granular reporting could facilitate
reproducibility (i.e., it is easier to reproduce one action with more
details than multiple actions with fewer details per action); earlier
reporting could facilitate discussion by making it practical for the
research process (extending the idea of Registered Reports; Chambers
2013). As findings become replicated and more consensus about a finding
starts to arise, findings could move up the `chain' and be integrated
into scholarly articles and textbooks. Articles and books would then
provide overviews and larger narratives to understand historical
developments within scholarly research. Figure 1 provides a conceptual
depiction of how these different forms of documenting findings relate to
each other.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{assets/fig1} 

}

\caption{Conceptual depiction of how different forms of scholarly communication relate to each other in both detail and certainty.}\label{fig:unnamed-chunk-2}
\end{figure}

Below I extend on technical details for a modular scholarly
communication infrastructure that facilitates (more) continuous
communication and builds on recent advances in Web infrastructures. The
premise of this scholarly infrastructure is a wider interpretation of
the five functions of a scholarly communication system, where
registration is (more) complete, certification occurs by embedding
chronology to prevent misrepresentation and by increased potential for
verification and peer discussion, unrestricted awareness (i.e., access)
is embedded in the underlying peer-to-peer protocol that locks it open
by design, archival is facilitated by simplified copying, and making
more specific scholarly evaluation possible to improve incentives (for
details on how such evaluation systems might work, see Chris Hartgerink
and Zelst 2018). First, I expand on the functionality of the Internet
protocol \href{https://datproject.org}{Dat} and how it facilitates
improved dissemination and archival. Second, I illustrate an initial
design of modular scholarly communication using this protocol to
facilitate better registration and certification.

\hypertarget{dat-protocol}{%
\subsection{Dat protocol}\label{dat-protocol}}

The Dat protocol (\texttt{dat://}) is a peer-to-peer protocol, with
persistent public keys per filesystem (Ogden, McKelvey, and Madsen
2017). Each filesystem is a folder that lives on the Dat network. Upon
creation, each Dat filesystem receives a unique 64 character hash
address, which provides read-only access to anyone who has knowledge of
the hash. Below an example filesystem is presented. Each Dat filesystem
has a persistent public key, which is unaffected by bit-level changes
within it (e.g., when a file is modified or created). Other peer-to-peer
protocols, such as BitTorrent or the Inter Planetary File System (IPFS),
receive new public keys upon bit-level changes in the filesystem and
require re-sharing those keys after each change.

\begin{Shaded}
\begin{Highlighting}[]
\ExtensionTok{0c6...613/}
\KeywordTok{|}\ExtensionTok{---}\NormalTok{ file1}
\KeywordTok{|}\ExtensionTok{---}\NormalTok{ file2}
\KeywordTok{|}\ExtensionTok{---}\NormalTok{ file3}
\KeywordTok{|}\ExtensionTok{---}\NormalTok{ file4}
\end{Highlighting}
\end{Shaded}

Bit-level changes within a Dat filesystem are verified with
cryptographically signed hashes of the changes in a Merkle Tree. In
effect, using a Merkle Tree creates a verified append-only register. In
a Merkle Tree, contents are decomposed into chunks that are subsequently
hashed in a tree (as illustrated in Figure 2), adding each new action to
the tree at the lowest level. These hashes are cryptographically signed
with the permitted users' private keys. The Dat protocol regards all
actions in its filesystem as \texttt{put} or \texttt{del} commands to
the filesystem, allowing all operations on the filesystem to be regarded
as actions append to a register (i.e., log). For example, if an empty
\texttt{file5} was added to the Dat filesystem presented above, the
register would include \texttt{{[}put{]}\ /file5\ 0\ B\ (0\ blocks)}; if
we delete the file, it would log \texttt{{[}del{]}\ /file5}. The
complete register for this Dat filesystem is as follows

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{assets/Hash_Tree.svg} 

}

\caption{A diagram depicting how a Merkle Tree hashes initial chunks of information into one top hash, with which the content can be verified.}\label{fig:unnamed-chunk-3}
\end{figure}

\begin{Shaded}
\begin{Highlighting}[]
\ExtensionTok{dat}\NormalTok{://0c6...613}

\ExtensionTok{1}\NormalTok{ [put] /file1 0 B (0 blocks)}
\ExtensionTok{2}\NormalTok{ [put] /file2 0 B (0 blocks)}
\ExtensionTok{3}\NormalTok{ [put] /file3 0 B (0 blocks)}
\ExtensionTok{4}\NormalTok{ [put] /file4 0 B (0 blocks)}
\ExtensionTok{5}\NormalTok{ [put] /file5 0 B (0 blocks)}
\ExtensionTok{6}\NormalTok{ [del] /file5}
\end{Highlighting}
\end{Shaded}

The persistent public key combined with the append-only register,
results in persistent versioned addresses for filesystems that also
ensure content integrity. For example, based on the register presented
above, we see that version 5 includes \texttt{file5} whereas version 6
does not. By appending \texttt{+5} to the public key
(\texttt{dat://0c66...613+5}) we can view the Dat filesystem as it
existed at version 5 and be ensured that the contents we receive are the
exact contents at that version. If the specific Dat filesystem is
available from at least one peer on the network, it means that both link
rot and content drift (Klein et al. 2014; Jones et al. 2016) could
become superfluous.

Any content posted to the Dat protocol is as publicly available as the
public key of that Dat filesystem is shared. More specifically, the Dat
protocol is inherently open. As such, if that key is widely shared, the
content will also be harder or impossible to remove from the network.
Conversely, if that key is shared among just few people that content can
more easily disappear from the network but remains more private. This is
important in light of privacy issues, because researchers cannot unshare
personal data after they have widely broadcasted it. However, because
the Dat protocol is a peer-to-peer protocol and users connect directly
to each other, information is not mediated and can also help improve
secure and private transferring of sensitive data. Users would (most
likely) also remain personally responsible for the information they
(wrongly) disclose on the network.

\hypertarget{verified-modular-scholarly-communication}{%
\subsection{Verified modular scholarly
communication}\label{verified-modular-scholarly-communication}}

Here I propose an initial technical design of verified modular scholarly
communication using the Dat protocol. Scholarly modules are instantiated
as separate Dat filesystems for each researcher or for each module of
scholarly content. Scholarly content could entail virtually anything the
researcher wants or needs to communicate in order to verify findings
(see also Chris Hartgerink and Zelst 2018). Hence, there is no
restriction to text as it is in the current article-based scholarly
communication system; it may also include photographs, data files,
scripts, etc. Note that all presented hypothetical scenarios below
include shortened Dat links and the appendix shows the full links.

\hypertarget{scholarly-profiles}{%
\subsubsection{Scholarly profiles}\label{scholarly-profiles}}

Before communicating research modules, a researcher would need to have a
place to broadcast that information. Increasingly, researchers are
acquiring centralized scholarly profiles to identify the work they do,
such as ORCIDs, ResearcherIDs, Google Scholar profiles, or ResearchGate
profiles. A decentralized scholarly profile in a Dat filesystem is
similar and provides a unique ID (i.e., public key) for each researcher.
However, researchers can modify their profiles freely because they
retain full ownership and control of their data (as opposed to
centralized profiles) and are not tied to one platform. As such, with
decentralized scholarly profiles on the Dat network, the researcher
permits others access to their profile instead of a service permitting
them to have a profile.

Each Dat filesystem is initialized with a \texttt{dat.json} with some
initial metadata, including its own Dat public key, the title (i.e.,
name) of the filesystem and a description. For example, Alice wants to
create a scholarly profile and initializes her Dat filesystem, resulting
in:

\begin{Shaded}
\begin{Highlighting}[]
\FunctionTok{\{}
  \DataTypeTok{"title"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"Alice"}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"description"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"I am a physicist at CERN-LHC. As a fan of the decentralized Web, I look forward to communicating my research in a digital native manner and in a way that is not limited to just text."}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"url"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"dat://b49...551"}
\FunctionTok{\}}
\end{Highlighting}
\end{Shaded}

Because \texttt{dat.json} is a generic container for metadata across the
Dat network, I propose adding \texttt{scholarly-metadata.json} with some
more specific metadata (i.e., data about the profile) for a scholarly
context. As the bare minimum, we initialize a scholarly profile metadata
file as

\begin{Shaded}
\begin{Highlighting}[]
\FunctionTok{\{}
  \DataTypeTok{"type"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"scholarly-profile"}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"url"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"dat://b49...551"}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"parents"}\FunctionTok{:} \OtherTok{[]}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"roots"}\FunctionTok{:} \OtherTok{[]}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"main"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"/cv.pdf"}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"follows"}\FunctionTok{:} \OtherTok{[]}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"modules"}\FunctionTok{:} \OtherTok{[]}
\FunctionTok{\}}
\end{Highlighting}
\end{Shaded}

where the \texttt{type} property indicates it is a scholarly profile.
The \texttt{url} property provides a reference to the public key of
Alice herself (i.e., self-referencing). The \texttt{parents} property is
where Alice can indicate her ``scholarly parents'' (e.g., supervisors,
mentors); the \texttt{roots} property is inherited from her scholarly
parents and links back to the root(s) of her scholarly genealogy. The
\texttt{main} property indicates the main file for Alice her profile.
The \texttt{follows} property links to other decentralized scholarly
profiles or decentralized scholarly modules that Alice wants to watch
for updates. Finally, the \texttt{modules} property refers to versioned
scholarly modules, which serves as Alice her public registrations.

Assuming Alice is the first person in her research program to use a
decentralized scholarly profile, she is unable to indicate
\texttt{parents} or inherit \texttt{roots}. However, Bob and Eve are her
PhD student and she helps them set up a decentralized scholarly profile.
As such, their profiles do contain a parent: Alice's profile. Based on
this genealogy, we would be able to automatically construct
self-reported genealogical trees for scholarly profiles. Bob's
\texttt{scholarly-metadata.json} subsequently looks as follows

\begin{Shaded}
\begin{Highlighting}[]
\FunctionTok{\{}
  \DataTypeTok{"type"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"scholarly-profile"}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"url"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"dat://c3a...a1b"}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"parents"}\FunctionTok{:} \OtherTok{[} \StringTok{"dat://b49...551"} \OtherTok{]}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"roots"}\FunctionTok{:} \OtherTok{[} \StringTok{"dat://b49...551"} \OtherTok{]}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"main"}\FunctionTok{:} \KeywordTok{null}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"follows"}\FunctionTok{:} \OtherTok{[} \OtherTok{]}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"modules"}\FunctionTok{:} \OtherTok{[} \OtherTok{]}
\FunctionTok{\}}
\end{Highlighting}
\end{Shaded}

Alice wants to stay up to date with the work from her PhD students Bob
and Eve and adds their profiles to the \texttt{follows} property. By
adding the unique Dat links to their scholarly profiles to her
\texttt{follows} property, the profiles can be watched in order to build
a chronological feed that continuously updates. Whenever Bob (or Eve)
changes something in their profile, Alice gets a post in her
chronological feed. For example, when Bob follows someone, when Eve
posts a new scholarly module, or when Bob updates his \texttt{main}
property. In contrast to existing social media, Alice can either fully
unfollow Bob, which removes all of Bob's updates from her feed, or
``freeze follow'' where she simply does not get any future updates. A
``freeze follow'' follows a static and specific version of the profile
by adding a version number to the followed link (e.g.,
\texttt{dat://...+12}).

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{assets/fig3} 

}

\caption{Conceptual diagram of scholarly profiles and following others. Network propagation to rank N can be used to facilitate discovery of researchers and to build networks of researchers.}\label{fig:unnamed-chunk-4}
\end{figure}

Using the \texttt{follows} property, Alice can propagate her feed deeper
into her network, as depicted in 3. More specifically, Alice her own
profile, rank zero in the network, extends to the people she follows
(i.e., Bob and Eve are rank one). Subsequently, the profiles Bob and Eve
follow are of rank three. By using recursive functions to crawl the
extended network to rank \(N\), edges in the network are easily
discovered despite the (potential) lack of direct connections (Travers
and Milgram 1969).

The \texttt{main} property can be used by a researcher to build a
personalized profile beyond the metadata. For example, Alice wants to
make sure that people who know the Dat link to her scholarly profile can
access her Curriculum Vitae, so she adds \texttt{/cv.pdf} as the
\texttt{main} to her scholarly profile. Whenever she submits a job
application, she can link to her versioned scholarly profile (e.g.,
\texttt{dat://b49...551+13}). Afterwards, she can keep updating her
profile whatever way she likes. She could even choose to host her
website on the decentralized Web by attaching a personal webpage with
\texttt{/index.html}. Because of the versioned link and the properties
of the Dat protocol, she can rest assured that the version she submitted
is the version the reviewing committee sees. Vice versa, whenever she
receives a versioned link to a scholarly profile, she can rest assured
it is what the researcher wanted her to see.

The \texttt{modules} property contains an array of versioned Dat links
to scholarly modules. What these scholarly modules are and how they are
shaped is explained in the next section. They are very similar to a
scholarly profile in the sense that it is a Dat filesystem that contains
information. The \texttt{modules} property differs from the
\texttt{follows} property in that it can only contain versioned Dat
links, which serve as registrations of the outputs the researcher. Where
a versioned link in the \texttt{follows} property is regarded as a
``freeze follow,'' a versioned link in the \texttt{modules} property is
the registration and public communication of the output. The versioned
links also prevent duplicate entries of outputs that are repeatedly
updated. For example, a scholarly module containing a theory could be
registered repeatedly over the timespan of a several days or years. If
the researcher would register non-versioned links of the scholarly
module, registration would not be specific and the scholarly profile
could contain duplicates. By including only versioned links the
registrations are specific and unique.

\hypertarget{scholarly-modules}{%
\subsubsection{Scholarly modules}\label{scholarly-modules}}

Scholarly research is composed of time-dependent pieces of information
(i.e., modules) that chronologically follow each other. For example,
predictions precede data and results, otherwise they become
postdictions. In a typical theory-testing research study, which adheres
to the framework of a modern empirical research cycle (Groot 1994), we
can identify at least eight chronological modules of research outputs:
(1) Theory, (2) predictions, (3) study design, (4) study materials, (5)
data, (6) code for analysis, (7) results, (8) discussion, and (9)
summary. Sometimes we might iterate between steps, such as adjusting a
theory due to insights gathered when formulating the predictions.
Continuously communicating these in the form of modules as they are
produced, by registering versioned references to Dat filesystems in a
scholarly profile as explained before, could fulfill the five functions
of a scholarly communication system and is unconstrained by the current
journal/article based system (see also Chris Hartgerink and Zelst 2018).

These scholarly modules each live in their own filesystem, first on the
researcher's computer and when synchronized, on the Dat network. Hence,
researchers can interact with files on their own machine as they are
used to. The Dat network only registers changes in the filesystem when
information is synchronized to it. As such, researchers can initialize a
Dat filesystem on their computer and, for example, copy private
information into the filesystem, anonymize it and only then synchronize
it with the Dat network (note: this does not require connection to the
Internet, but initialization of the protocol). The private information
will then not be available in the version history of the Dat filesystem.

Metadata for scholarly modules also consists of a generic
\texttt{dat.json} and a more specific \texttt{scholarly-metadata.json}.
The \texttt{dat.json} contains the title of the module, the description,
and its own Dat link. For example, Alice communicates the first module
on the network, where she proposes a theory; the \texttt{dat.json} file
for this module is

\begin{Shaded}
\begin{Highlighting}[]
\FunctionTok{\{}
  \DataTypeTok{"title"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"Mock Theory"}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"description"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"This is a mock theory but it could just as well be a real one."}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"url"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"dat://dbf...d82"}
\FunctionTok{\}}
\end{Highlighting}
\end{Shaded}

Again, more specific metadata about the dencentralized scholarly module
is added in \texttt{scholarly-metadata.json}. As the bare minimum, the
metadata for a scholarly module is initialized as

\begin{Shaded}
\begin{Highlighting}[]
\FunctionTok{\{}
  \DataTypeTok{"type"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"scholarly-module"}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"url"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"dat://dbf...d82"}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"authors"}\FunctionTok{:} \OtherTok{[}
    \StringTok{"dat://b49...551"}\OtherTok{,}
    \StringTok{"dat://167...a26"}
  \OtherTok{]}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"parents"}\FunctionTok{:} \OtherTok{[]}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"roots"}\FunctionTok{:} \OtherTok{[]}\FunctionTok{,}
  \DataTypeTok{"main"}\FunctionTok{:} \StringTok{"/theory.md"}
\FunctionTok{\}}
\end{Highlighting}
\end{Shaded}

These metadata indicate aspects that are essential in determining
contents and provenance of the module. First, we specify that it is a
scholarly module in the \texttt{type} property. Second, we specify its
own Dat \texttt{url} for reference purposes. Third, an array of Dat
links in the \texttt{authors} property links to scholarly profiles for
authorship. Subsequently, if the module is a direct consequence of a
previous registered module, we specify the Dat link of the preceding
module(s) in the \texttt{parents} property in the form of a versioned
Dat link. Tracing the parents' parents forms a chronology of findings,
leading ultimately to the \texttt{roots} property. In practice, the
\texttt{roots} property is inherited from the immediate parents. Because
the presented hypothetical module above is the first on the network, it
has no parents or roots. The \texttt{main} property specifies a single
landing page/file of the scholarly module. For a text based scholarly
module, \texttt{main} might be \texttt{/index.html} (or
\texttt{/theory.md} as it is here), whereas for a data module that could
be \texttt{/data.csv}. For more complex modules, a guidebook to navigate
the module could be included. The researcher can also store other
relevant assets in the Dat filesystem, such as converted files or
supporting files. For text based scholarly module, assets could include
figures; for data based scholarly modules assets could include
codebooks.

To register a module into the researcher's profile, the versioned Dat
link is included in the \texttt{modules} array on the profile. More
specifically, when the registration process is initiated, the Dat
filesystem is inspected for the latest version number, which is appended
to the Dat link before it is put in the \texttt{modules} property.
Specifically for Alice her theory, she was at version 19 when she wanted
to register it. This means that \texttt{dat://dbf...d82+19} is appended
to the \texttt{modules} array in her scholarly profile. All the users
who follow Alice get an update that she registered her theory, with a
versioned link that is unique and persistent, referring to exactly the
content Alice registered. Alice can keep updating her theory locally,
without it affecting what the people who follow her see, because it does
not affect version 19. When the module is registered, others can view
the most recent version of the Dat filesystem (e.g., theory) by removing
the version from the Dat link (or view any other synchronized version if
available from the network).

Figure 4 depicts how the scholarly modules relate to each other (Panel
B). The versioned, registered scholarly modules become the parent and
root links in subsequent child modules. For example, a set of
predictions link back to the theory they are distilled from; a study
design links back to the predictions it is planned to test and by
extension to the theory it is based on. Panel B in 4 conceptually
depicts one contained empirical research cycle registered in this way.
The links between versioned scholarly modules embeds the chronological
nature of the research process in its communication.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{assets/fig4} 

}

\caption{Conceptual representations of how scholarly profiles relate to each other (Panel A), how scholarly modules relate to each other (Panel B), how scholarly profiles and modules create a network of scholarly activity in both researchers and research (Panel C), and }\label{fig:unnamed-chunk-6}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{verification}{%
\subsubsection{Verification}\label{verification}}

In order to detect whether scholarly modules that a researcher claims to
have authored are indeed (partly) theirs, the scholarly module needs to
also assign the profile as author. For example, Alice and Eve claim to
have authored version 19 of the ``Theory'' module in their profiles
(Figure 4, Panel C). Because a module can only be edited by its author,
we can inspect the scholarly module to corroborate this. For verified
authorship, the module should ascribe authorship to Alice and Eve. To do
this, we inspect \texttt{scholarly-metadata.json} of the ``Theory''
module at the registered version (i.e., version 19). If the versioned
theory module also ascribes authorship to Alice or Eve, we have two-way
verification of authorship (Figure 4, Panel D). In other words,
registered scholarly modules must corroborate the authorship claims of
the scholarly profiles in order to become verified.

Unverified authorship can happen when a researcher incorrectly claims
authorship over a module or when a module ascribes authorship to a
researcher who does not claim it. In Figure 4 Panel D, for example, Bob
has claimed authorship of the data module, which is not corroborated by
the scholarly module. Unverified authorship of this kind (i.e., where a
researcher incorrectly claims authorship) is helpful in preventing
misrepresentation of previous work by that researcher. Unverified
authorship where a researcher is incorrectly ascribed authorship can
have various origins. A researcher might remove a versioned module from
their profile, effectively distancing themselves from the module
(similar to retracting the work but on a more individual level). In a
similar vein, it might also be that the author registered a later
version of the module in their profile and deleted the old version
(similar to a corrigendum).

\hypertarget{prototype}{%
\subsubsection{Prototype}\label{prototype}}

In order to show that decentralized, modular scholarly communication is
not just a hypothetical exercise, a minimal working prototype is
available on the Dat network. This prototype is accesible using
\href{https://beakerbrowser.com}{Beaker Browser} at
\texttt{dat://b06...3dd/} (see Supporting File for full URL). This
prototype is currently only available within Beaker Browser because
specific Application Programmatic Interfaces (APIs) that directly
interface with the Dat protocol are not yet available in the most
commonly used webbrowsers (e.g., Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome).

The minimal working prototype ingests a network of decentralized
scholarly modules and profiles. More specifically, it ingests all
content to rank \(N\) of the network, using
\href{https://github.com/beakerbrowser/webdb}{\texttt{webdb}}.
\texttt{webdb} collects the scholarly metadata from each scholarly
module and scholarly profile and consolidates these disparate pieces of
information into a local database. This database can be considered
temporary; the original information still has its primary origin in the
disparate scholarly modules and scholarly profiles that live on the Dat
network. As such, the same database can be reconstructed at any time
without any issues, assuming the modules are still available. Figure 5
presents a screenshot of the prototype, which looks like any other
webpage to the user but does not have a centralized server providing the
content. Note also the link at the bottom showcasing the versioned link
to the analysis file.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{assets/fig5} 

}

\caption{Screencap of the minimal prototype of decentralized scholarly communication. The prototype resembles a regular webpage on the userside, but on the backend it runs entirely on Dat filesystems that live on a decentralized network.}\label{fig:unnamed-chunk-8}
\end{figure}

Procedurally, the prototype takes Alice's scholarly profile as starting
point, subsequently ingesting the network presented in Figure 4. By
doing so, we get a one-on-one replication of Alice's perspective
(regardless of whether we are Alice or not). As such, Alice's Dat link
serves as the starting point (rank zero). The metadata contained in her
profile is ingested into our local database. Subsequently, the links in
her profile to other scholarly modules (or profiles) are ingested into
the database (rank one), and the links they have (rank two), and so on
(to rank \(N\)). The following JavaScript code produces this local
database for Alice specifically (\texttt{dat://b49...551}) but can be
replaced with Bob's, Eve's, or anyone else's scholarly profile to
receive their personal network.

\begin{Shaded}
\begin{Highlighting}[]
\CommentTok{// npm install -g @beaker/webdb}
\KeywordTok{const}\NormalTok{ WebDB }\OperatorTok{=} \AttributeTok{require}\NormalTok{(}\StringTok{'@beaker/webdb'}\NormalTok{)}

\KeywordTok{let}\NormalTok{ webdb }\OperatorTok{=} \KeywordTok{new} \AttributeTok{WebDB}\NormalTok{(}\StringTok{'view'}\NormalTok{)}

\VariableTok{webdb}\NormalTok{.}\AttributeTok{define}\NormalTok{(}\StringTok{'modules'}\OperatorTok{,} \OperatorTok{\{}
    \DataTypeTok{filePattern}\OperatorTok{:}\NormalTok{ [  }\StringTok{'/scholarly-metadata.json'}\NormalTok{  ]}\OperatorTok{,}
    \DataTypeTok{index}\OperatorTok{:}\NormalTok{ [ }\StringTok{'type'}\OperatorTok{,} \StringTok{'authors'}\OperatorTok{,} \StringTok{'parents'}\OperatorTok{,} \StringTok{'root'}\OperatorTok{,}
     \StringTok{'main'}\OperatorTok{,} \StringTok{'follows'}\OperatorTok{,} \StringTok{'modules'}\NormalTok{ ]}
\OperatorTok{\}}\NormalTok{)}

\NormalTok{async }\KeywordTok{function} \AttributeTok{ingestPortal}\NormalTok{ (url) }\OperatorTok{\{}
\NormalTok{  await }\VariableTok{webdb}\NormalTok{.}\AttributeTok{open}\NormalTok{()}

  \KeywordTok{let}\NormalTok{ archive }\OperatorTok{=} \KeywordTok{new} \AttributeTok{DatArchive}\NormalTok{(url)}
\NormalTok{  await }\VariableTok{webdb}\NormalTok{.}\AttributeTok{indexArchive}\NormalTok{(url)}
  
  \KeywordTok{let}\NormalTok{ scholRaw }\OperatorTok{=}\NormalTok{ await }\VariableTok{archive}\NormalTok{.}\AttributeTok{readFile}\NormalTok{(}
    \StringTok{'/scholarly-metadata.json'}\NormalTok{)}
  
  \KeywordTok{let}\NormalTok{ scholParsed }\OperatorTok{=}\NormalTok{ await }\VariableTok{JSON}\NormalTok{.}\AttributeTok{parse}\NormalTok{(}
\NormalTok{    scholRaw)}
  
  \ControlFlowTok{if}\NormalTok{ (}\VariableTok{scholParsed}\NormalTok{.}\AttributeTok{type} \OperatorTok{===} \StringTok{'scholarly-profile'}\NormalTok{) }\OperatorTok{\{}
    \VariableTok{console}\NormalTok{.}\AttributeTok{log}\NormalTok{(scholParsed)}
    \VariableTok{scholParsed}\NormalTok{.}\VariableTok{follows}\NormalTok{.}\AttributeTok{concat}\NormalTok{(}
      \VariableTok{scholParsed}\NormalTok{.}\AttributeTok{modules}\NormalTok{).}\AttributeTok{forEach}\NormalTok{((val) }\OperatorTok{=>} \OperatorTok{\{}
      \AttributeTok{ingestPortal}\NormalTok{(val)}
    \OperatorTok{\}}\NormalTok{)}
  \OperatorTok{\}}
\OperatorTok{\}}

\AttributeTok{ingestPortal}\NormalTok{(}\StringTok{"dat://b49...551"}\NormalTok{)}
\end{Highlighting}
\end{Shaded}

The presented prototype provides a portal to the information contained
in the modules, but is not the sole portal to access that information.
Because the modules live on a decentralized network and are open by
design, anyone may build a portal to view that information. As such,
this is not a proposal for a platform but for infrastructure. The
difference between platforms and infrastructure is vital in light of
ownership and responsibility of communicated content and the moderation
of that content. As opposed to centralized services that carry the legal
burden and therefore moderate its platform, this type of infrastructure
does not take such a role and merely aims to facilitate the individual.
As a consequence, the legal burden remains with the individual.
Moreover, platforms require people to go to one place (e.g., you cannot
view content of ResearchGate on Academia.edu or Elsevier's content on
Wiley's webpage); this infrastructure would give the potential for
various types of usage to take place on the same type of infrastructure.

\hypertarget{discussion}{%
\subsection{Discussion}\label{discussion}}

The proposed design for decentralized, verified, provenance based
modular communication on the Dat protocol fulfills a wide
conceptualization of the functions of a scholarly communications system
from library and information sciences (Roosendaal and Geurts 1998;
Sompel et al. 2004). Due to more modular and continuous communication,
it is more difficult to selectively register results when the preceding
steps have publicly been registered already. Moreover, time of
communication is decided by the researcher, making it more feasible for
researchers to communciate their research efforts without biases
introduced at the journal level. Certification of results is improved by
embedding the chronology of the empirical research cycle in the
communication process itself and making peer to peer discussion
constructive and less obstructed by hindsight bias (Nickerson 1998).
Unfettered awareness of research is facilitated by using an open by
design infrastructure that is the peer-to-peer Dat protocol. Moreover,
because all content is open by design and independent of service
platforms, text- and data-mining may be applied freely without technical
restrictions by service providers. The removal of these technical and
service restrictions may facilitate innovations in discovery of content
and the potential for new business models to come into existence. Based
on the links between scholarly modules, the arising network structure
can be used to help evaluate networks of research(ers) instead of
counting publications and citations (Chris Hartgerink and Zelst 2018).
Archival is facilitated by making it trivially easy to create local
copies of large sets of content, facilitating the Lots Of Copies Keeps
Stuff Safe (LOCKSS; Reich and Rosenthal 2001; Domenico and Arenas 2017)
principle to be more widely used than just approved organizations.
Moreover, with append-only registers, the provenance of content can also
be archived more readily than it is now. These functions also apply to
non-empirical research that requires provenance of information (e.g.,
qualitative studies).

By producing scholarly content on a decentralized infrastructure,
diversity of how research is consumed and discovered can be facilitated.
Currently, content lives on the webserver of the publisher and is often
solely served at the publisher's webpage due to copyright restrictions
(except for open access articles; Piwowar et al. 2018). If the design of
the publisher's webpage does not suit the user's needs {[}e.g., due to
red color blindness affecting approximately 1 in 20 males and 1 in 100
females;\url{doi:10.1016/j.gendis.2015.02.006}{]}, there is relatively
little a user can do. Moreover, service providers that are not the
rightsholder (i.e., publisher) now cannot fulfill that need for users.
By making all content open, building on content is possible by anyone
who feels like it. For example, someone can build a portal that
automatically shows content with color shifting for people who have red
(or other types of) color blindness. Building and upgrading automated
translation services are another way of improving accessibility (e.g.,
\href{http://translexy.com/}{translexy.com/}), which is currently
restricted due to copyright. Other examples of diverse ways of consuming
or discovering research might include text-based comparisons of modules
to build recommender algorithms that provide contrasting and
corroborating views to users. Stimulating diversity in how to consume
and discover content is key to making scholarly research accessible to
as many people and in order to attempt to keep some pace with the
tremendous amount of information published each year
(\href{https://api.crossref.org/works?filter=type:journal-article,from-pub-date:2017,until-pub-date:2017\&rows=0}{\textgreater{}3
million articles in 2017}). As such, we have collectively passed the
point of being able to comprehend the relevant information and should no
longer strive to eliminate all uncertainty in knowing but find ways to
deal with that uncertainty better (Bridle 2018). As such, alternatives
in consuming, discovering, and learning about knowledge are a necessity.
Open Knowledge Maps is an existing example of innovative discovery
mechanisms based on openly licensed and machine-readable content
(Christopher Kittel und Asura Enkhbayar 2016). There would be more
smaller pieces of information in the scholarly modules approach, which
is counterbalanced by the network structure and lack of technical
restrictions to build tools to digest that information --- this may make
those larger amounts of smaller units (i.e., modules) more digestable
than the smaller volume of larger units (i.e., articles).

The proposed design is only the first in a multi-layer infrastructure
that would need to be developed moving forward. Currently, I only
provide a model on the container format for how to store metadata for
modules --- not how the data is stored in the module itself or how the
individual could go about doing so. As such, the next layer to the
proposed infrastructure would require further specification of how
contents are stored. For example, for text-based modules, what file
formats should be the standard or allowed? It would be unfeasible to
allow any file format due to readability into the future (e.g., Word
2003 files are likely to be problematic). Standards similar to current
publications could prove worthwhile for text (i.e., JATS XML), but
impractical to non-technical users. As such, does the original file need
to be in JATS XML when it can also easily be converted? (e.g., Markdown
to JATS XML; Johnston 2016) Other specifications for data, code,
materials would also be needed moving forward (e.g., no proprietary
binary files such as SPSS data files). In order to make those standards
practical to individuals not privy to the technical details, the next
infrastructure layer would be building user-facing applications that
interface with the Dat protocol and take the requirements into account.
These would then do the heavy lifting for the users, guiding them
through potential conversion processes. An example of a rich editing
environment that takes the machine readability of scholarly text to the
next level, and makes this relatively easy to the end-user, is Dokie.li
(Capadisli et al. 2017). This editing environment provides a What You
See Is What You Get (WYSIWYG) editor, while at the same time providing
semantic enrichments to the text (e.g., discerning between positive,
negative, corroborating, or other forms of citations).

These new infrastructure layers would provide a much needed upgrade to
the security of scholarly communication. Many of the scholarly
publisher's websites do not use an appropriate level of security in
transferring information to and from the user. More specifically, only
26\% of all scholarly publishers use HTTPS (C.H.J. Hartgerink 2018).
Science Magazine only recently implemented HTTPS, and Sage Publications
is one example that still has not. This means that any information
transferred to or from the user can be grabbed by anyone in the physical
proximity of that person (amongst other scenarios) --- including
usernames and passwords. In other words, publisher's lack of up-to-date
security practices put the user at risk, but also the publisher. Some
publishers for example complained about Sci-Hub, alleging that it
illegally retrieved articles by phishing researcher's credentials. A
lack of HTTPS would facilitate the illegal retrieval of user
credentials, hence those publishers would ironically facilitate these
kinds of activities they say are illegal (Bohannon 2016). Beyond the
potential of missed revenue for pay-to-access publishers, security
negligence is worrisome because the accuracy of scholarly content is at
risk. Man in the middle attacks, where a middleman inserts themselves
between the user and the server, can surreptitiously distort content,
with practical effects for scientific practice (e.g., changing author
names) and real life effects for professions using results for their
jobs (e.g., milligram dosages replaced by gram dosages). By building a
scholarly communication infrastructure on top of the Dat protocol, all
communications are encrypted in transit from one end to the other by
default. For the format of communications, scholarly publishers may
currently be unknowing distributors of malware in their PDFs distributed
to (paying) readers. More specifically, an estimated .3-2\% of scholarly
PDFs contain malware (Nissim et al. 2017), although the types of malware
remain ill specified. By implementing scholarly modules that are
converted on the user's system (e.g., JATS XML, HTML, Markdown), the
attack vector on readers of the scholarly literature can be reduced by
moving away from server-side generated PDFs, which potentiall contain
clandestine malware.

\hypertarget{limitations}{%
\subsection{Limitations}\label{limitations}}

One of the major points of debate may be that the scholarly modules are
chronologically ordered only (both internally and externally). As such,
the temporal distance between two actions within a scholarly module or
between two scholarly modules is unknown. Within a scholarly module and
Dat filesystem, chronological append-only actions are more reliable to
register from a technical perspective than time-based append-only
registers. This has its origin in the fact that creation-,
modification-, and last opened times can technically be altered by
willing users (see for example
\href{https://superuser.com/questions/504829}{superuser.com/questions/504829}).
If timestamps are altered, people can fabricate records that seem
genuine and chronlogical, but are not --- undermining the whole point of
immutable append-only registers. Hardcoded timestamps in the scholarly
metadata would be an even greater risk due to the potential for direct
modification (i.e., it would only require editing the
\texttt{scholarly-metadata.json} file in a text editor). The external
ordering, that is the chronology of scholarly modules, might be gamed as
well. Consider the scenario where a predictions module at version 12 is
said to be the parent of a design module at version 26 but does not
exist yet at the time of registration for the design module. An
individual with malicious intentions might do this and retroactively
fabricate a the parent predictions. So, despite a specific, persistent,
and unique parent Dat link being provided, the chronology could be
undermined, which in turn threatens the provenance of information. It
would require some effort from said researcher to subsequently ensure
that the Dat filesystem containing the predictions at that version
contains the contents that suits them, but it should not be ruled out as
a possibility. Other mechanisms could be put in place to verify the
existence of parent links at the time of registration (which is
technically feasible but would require additional bodies of trust) or to
technically investigate for filler actions in a Dat filesystems when
artificially high version numbers are registered.

Despite the potential of building an open by design scholarly
infrastructure on top of the Dat protocol, there are also domains where
advances need to be made. Until those advances are made, widespread use
in the form of a scholarly communication system remains impractical and
premature. These developments can occur asynchronously of the further
development of this scholarly communication infrastructure. These
domains (amongst others) include technical aspects and implementations
of the Dat protocol itself, implementations of APIs built on top of it,
legal exploration of intellectual property on a peer to peer network,
privacy issues due to high difficulty of removing content permanently
once communicated, the usability of the proposed scholarly
infrastructure, and how to store information in the modules that is
machine readable but also easy-to-use for individuals.

The Dat protocol is functional, but is currently limited to NodeJS and
single-user write access. Because it is currently only available in
NodeJS, portability of the protocol is currently restricted to
JavaScript environments. An experimental implementation of the Dat
protocol is currently being built \href{https://github.com/datrs}{in
Rust}, which would greatly improve availability of the protocol to other
environments. Moreover, by being restricted to single-user write access,
Dat archives are not really portable across machines or users, although
work on multi-user write (i.e., multiple devices or users)
\href{https://github.com/mafintosh/hyperdb}{has recently been released}.
Other APIs built on top of the Dat protocol that are essential to
building a proposed infrastructure, such as \texttt{webdb}, also need to
be further refined in order to make them worthwhile. For example,
\texttt{webdb} currently does not index versioned Dat links but simply
the most recent versions. If these and other developments continue, the
benefits of the protocol will mature, may become readily available to
individuals from within their standard browser, and become more
practical to collaborate on. Considering this, the proposed design is
imperfect but timely, allowing for community driven iterations into
something more refined as implementations of the Dat protocol are also
refined and may become more widely used.

Despite the Dat protocol's peer-to-peer nature, intellectual property
laws still ascribe copyright upon creation and do not allow copying of
content except when explicitly permitted through non-restrictive
licenses by authors (Baldwin 2014). As such, intellectual property laws
could be used to hamper widespread copying when licensing is neglected
by authors. Legal uncertainty here might give rise to a chilling effect
to use the Dat protocol to share scholarly information. Moreover, it
seems virtually impossible to issue takedown notices for (retroactively
deemed) illicit content on the Dat protocol without removing all peer
copies on the network. As a result of this, social perception of the Dat
protocol might turn negative if high-profile cases of illicit or illegal
sharing occur (regardless of whether that is scholarly information or
something else). However, just as the Web requires local copies in cache
to function and which lawmakers made legal relatively quickly when the
Web was becoming widespread, the wider implementation of peer to peer
protocols to share content might also require reforms to allow for more
permissive copying of original content shared on the network.
Regardless, legal issues need to be thought about a priori and users
should be made aware that they carry responsibility for their shared
content. Given its inherent open and unrestricted sharing design, it
would make sense to use non-restrictive licenses on the scholarly
modules by default to prevent these legal issues for researchers wanting
to reuse and build on scholarly modules.

Similarly, we need to take seriously the issue that information on the
network, once copied by a peer or multiple peers, is increasingly
unlikely to be uncommunicated. The implications of this in light of
privacy legislations, ethical ramifications, and general negative
effects should not be underestimated. Because a Dat filesystem has a
stable public key and stores versions, the content remains available
even if the content is deleted from the filesystem. That is, users could
go to an older version and still find the file that was deleted. The
only way to truly undo the availablity of that information is to remove
all existing copies. Hence, it is worthwhile to ask the question whether
scholarly research that is based on personal data should ever be
conducted on the individual level data or whether this should be done on
higher level summaries of relations between variables (e.g., covariance
matrices). How these summaries can be verified, would remain an issue to
tackle. Conversely, the limitation with respect to privacy is also a
benefit with regards to censorship, where information would also be much
harder to censure (in stark contrast to publishers that might be
pressured by governments; Philips 2017). Moreover, we might start
thinking about the ownership of data in research. In the case of human
subjects research, researchers now collect data and store it, but we
might consider decentralized data collection where human participants
produce their own data locally and simply permit a researcher to ingest
that into an analysis process (creating throwaway databases themselves
with \texttt{webdb} for example). This would in turn return ownership to
the participant and benefit transparency of data generated.

Bandwidth and persistent peers on the Dat protocol are highly correlated
issues that are key to a usable decentralized infrastructure. When there
are few peers on the network, information redundancy is low, content
attrition is (potentially) high, and bandwidth will be limited.
Subsequently, maximum data transfer of 40KB/s may be possible when few
peers with restricted bandwidth are available and are farther removed on
the physical network. Vice versa, in the most optimal scenario data
transfer could reach the maximum of the infrastructure between peers
(e.g., 1GB/s on peers located on an intranet). Considering that
replicating Dat filesystems is relatively easy given storage space, it
could be done by individuals, and (university) libraries seem like
particularly qualified and motivated candidates for persistent hosting
of content on the Dat network. These organizations often have
substantial server infrastructure available, would facilitate high data
transfer speeds, and also have a vested interested in preserving
scholarly content. With over 400 research libraries in Europe and over
\href{http://db.aflia.net/list/?q=6\&m=n}{900 academic libraries in
Africa} alone, bandwidth and redundancy could be addressed if sufficient
libraries participate in rehosting content. Moreover, the peer to peer
nature would also allow for researchers to keep accessing content in the
same way when the content is rehosted on the intranet and the wider
connection has service interruptions.

\hypertarget{conclusion}{%
\subsection{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}}

The semi-technical proposal for verified, modular, and provenance based
scholarly infrastructure on the Dat protocol synthesizes meta-research
on selective publication and human biases in research, technical
developments of new Web protocols, real-life issues in a lack of
diversity for consuming scholarly research, and library and information
science's perspectives on the five functions scholarly communication is
supposed to fulfill. With this initial proposal, a scholarly commons
seems feasible that provides a more complete and less biased register of
information and more constructive certification discussions, with access
to those who have an Internet connection, provides supportive archival
infrastructure that anyone may meaningfully participate in if they have
the physical means, and a scholarly commons that may provide new ways of
evaluating, consuming, and discovering research. The decentralized
nature of the Dat protocol requires less trust to be put in institutions
to maintain key data stores that are the fundament to any infrastructure
and replaces it with widespread distribution of that information.

\hypertarget{supporting-information}{%
\section{Supporting Information}\label{supporting-information}}

S1 File. Overview of original Dat links corresponding to shortened
links:
\url{https://github.com/chartgerink/2018dat-com/raw/master/assets/mock-modules-overview.ods}.

\hypertarget{references}{%
\section*{References}\label{references}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{References}

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1371ux2fjournal.pone.0084896}{}%
Assen, Marcel A. L. M. van, Robbie C. M. van Aert, Michèle B. Nuijten,
and Jelte M. Wicherts. 2014. ``Why Publishing Everything Is More
Effective Than Selective Publishing of Statistically Significant
Results.'' Edited by K. Brad Wray. \emph{PLoS ONE} 9 (1). Public Library
of Science (PLoS):e84896.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0084896}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-isbn:9780226261454}{}%
Baldwin, Melinda. 2015. \emph{Making Nature: The History of a Scientific
Journal}. University of Chicago Press.
\url{https://www.amazon.com/Making-Nature-History-Scientific-Journal/dp/022626145X?SubscriptionId=0JYN1NVW651KCA56C102\&tag=techkie-20\&linkCode=xm2\&camp=2025\&creative=165953\&creativeASIN=022626145X}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-isbn:9781400851911}{}%
Baldwin, Peter. 2014. \emph{The Copyright Wars: Three Centuries of
Trans-Atlantic Battle}. Princeton University Press.
\url{https://www.amazon.com/Copyright-Wars-Centuries-Trans-Atlantic-Battle-ebook/dp/B00KJNWGIC?SubscriptionId=AKIAIOBINVZYXZQZ2U3A\&tag=chimbori05-20\&linkCode=xm2\&camp=2025\&creative=165953\&creativeASIN=B00KJNWGIC}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1126ux2fscience.aaf5664}{}%
Bohannon, John. 2016. ``Who's Downloading Pirated Papers? Everyone.''
\emph{Science}. \url{https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf5664}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.3389ux2ffnhum.2018.00037}{}%
Brembs, Björn. 2018. ``Prestigious Science Journals Struggle to Reach
Even Average Reliability.'' \emph{Frontiers in Human Neuroscience} 12
(February). Frontiers Media SA.
\url{https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2018.00037}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-isbn:9781786635471}{}%
Bridle, James. 2018. \emph{New Dark Age: Technology and the End of the
Future}. Verso.
\url{https://www.amazon.com/New-Dark-Age-Technology-Future/dp/178663547X?SubscriptionId=AKIAIOBINVZYXZQZ2U3A\&tag=chimbori05-20\&linkCode=xm2\&camp=2025\&creative=165953\&creativeASIN=178663547X}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-dokieli}{}%
Capadisli, Sarven, Amy Guy, Ruben Verborgh, Christoph Lange, Soeren
Auer, and Tim Berners-Lee. 2017. ``Decentralised Authoring, Annotations
and Notifications for a Read-Write Web with Dokieli.''
\url{https://wayback.archive.org/web/20180807191810/http://csarven.ca/dokieli-rww}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1016ux2fj.cortex.2012.12.016}{}%
Chambers, Christopher D. 2013. ``Registered Reports: A New Publishing
Initiative at~Cortex.'' \emph{Cortex} 49 (3). Elsevier BV:609--10.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2012.12.016}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.12685ux2f027.7-4-2-157}{}%
Christopher Kittel und Asura Enkhbayar, Peter Kraker und. 2016. ``Open
Knowledge Maps: Creating a Visual Interface to the World's Scientific
Knowledge Based on Natural Language Processing.'' \emph{027.7
Zeitschrift Für Bibliothekskultur / Journal for Library Culture} 4
(2):98--103. \url{https://doi.org/10.12685/027.7-4-2-157}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1186ux2f2041-1480-5-28}{}%
Clark, Tim, Paolo N Ciccarese, and Carole A Goble. 2014.
``Micropublications: A Semantic Model for Claims, Evidence, Arguments
and Annotations in Biomedical Communications.'' \emph{Journal of
Biomedical Semantics} 5 (1). Springer Nature:28.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1186/2041-1480-5-28}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1103ux2fphysreve.95.022313}{}%
Domenico, Manlio De, and Alex Arenas. 2017. ``Modeling Structure and
Resilience of the Dark Network.'' \emph{Physical Review E} 95 (2).
American Physical Society (APS).
\url{https://doi.org/10.1103/physreve.95.022313}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1016ux2f0140-6736_91_90201-y}{}%
Easterbrook, P.J, R Gopalan, J.A Berlin, and D.R Matthews. 1991.
``Publication Bias in Clinical Research.'' \emph{The Lancet} 337 (8746).
Elsevier BV:867--72. \url{https://doi.org/10.1016/0140-6736(91)90201-y}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-isbn:9780226253251}{}%
Fleck, Ludwik. 1981. \emph{Genesis and Development of a Scientific
Fact}. University of Chicago Press.
\url{https://www.amazon.com/Genesis-Development-Scientific-Ludwik-Fleck/dp/0226253252?SubscriptionId=0JYN1NVW651KCA56C102\&tag=techkie-20\&linkCode=xm2\&camp=2025\&creative=165953\&creativeASIN=0226253252}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-isbn:9789023228912}{}%
Groot, A.D. de. 1994. \emph{Methodologie: Grondslagen van Onderzoek En
Denken in de Gedragswetenschappen {[}Methodology: Foundations of
Research and Thinking in the Behavioral Sciences{]}}. Assen, the
Netherlands: Van Gorcum.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-https-hartgerink}{}%
Hartgerink, C.H.J. 2018. ``Publishers Need to Stop Using Insecure
Http.''
\url{https://wayback.archive.org/web/20180807191523/https://opensource.com/article/18/5/scholarly-publishers-https}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.3390ux2fpublications6020021}{}%
Hartgerink, Chris, and Marino van Zelst. 2018. ````As-You-Go'' Instead
of ``After-the-Fact'': A Network Approach to Scholarly Communication and
Evaluation.'' \emph{Publications} 6 (2). MDPI AG:21.
\url{https://doi.org/10.3390/publications6020021}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-jatdown}{}%
Johnston, Paul. 2016. ``Jatdown: A Markdown Language for Writing Jats.''
\emph{Journal Article Tag Suite Conference (JATS-Con) Proceedings 2016
{[}Internet{]}.} \url{https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK350677/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1371ux2fjournal.pone.0167475}{}%
Jones, Shawn M., Herbert Van de Sompel, Harihar Shankar, Martin Klein,
Richard Tobin, and Claire Grover. 2016. ``Scholarly Context Adrift:
Three Out of Four URI References Lead to Changed Content.'' Edited by
Neil R. Smalheiser. \emph{PLOS ONE} 11 (12). Public Library of Science
(PLoS):e0167475. \url{https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0167475}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1629ux2fuksg.215}{}%
Kiefer, Randy S. 2015. ``Digital Preservation of Scholarly Content,
Focusing on the Example of the CLOCKSS Archive.'' \emph{Insights the
UKSG Journal} 28 (1). Ubiquity Press, Ltd.:91--96.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1629/uksg.215}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1108ux2feum0000000007185}{}%
Kircz, Joost G. 1998. ``Modularity: The Next Form of Scientific
Information Presentation?'' \emph{Journal of Documentation} 54 (2).
Emerald:210--35. \url{https://doi.org/10.1108/eum0000000007185}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1371ux2fjournal.pone.0115253}{}%
Klein, Martin, Herbert Van de Sompel, Robert Sanderson, Harihar Shankar,
Lyudmila Balakireva, Ke Zhou, and Richard Tobin. 2014. ``Scholarly
Context Not Found: One in Five Articles Suffers from Reference Rot.''
Edited by Judit Bar-Ilan. \emph{PLoS ONE} 9 (12). Public Library of
Science (PLoS):e115253.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0115253}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.7717ux2fpeerj-cs.78}{}%
Kuhn, Tobias, Christine Chichester, Michael Krauthammer, Núria
Queralt-Rosinach, Ruben Verborgh, George Giannakopoulos, Axel-Cyrille
Ngonga Ngomo, Raffaele Viglianti, and Michel Dumontier. 2016.
``Decentralized Provenance-Aware Publishing with Nanopublications.''
\emph{PeerJ Computer Science} 2 (August). PeerJ:e78.
\url{https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.78}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1007ux2fbf01173636}{}%
Mahoney, Michael J. 1977. ``Publication Prejudices: An Experimental
Study of Confirmatory Bias in the Peer Review System.'' \emph{Cognitive
Therapy and Research} 1 (2). Springer Nature:161--75.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1007/bf01173636}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1037ux2f1089-2680.2.2.175}{}%
Nickerson, Raymond S. 1998. ``Confirmation Bias: A Ubiquitous Phenomenon
in Many Guises.'' \emph{Review of General Psychology} 2 (2). American
Psychological Association (APA):175--220.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.2.2.175}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.3233ux2f978-1-61499-744-3-107}{}%
Nissim, Nir, Aviad Cohen, Jian Wu, Andrea Lanzi, Lior Rokach, Yuval
Elovici, and Lee Giles. 2017. ``Scholarly Digital Libraries as a
Platform for Malware Distribution.'' \emph{Cryptology and Information
Security Series}, 107--28.
\url{https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-744-3-107}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.17605ux2fOSF.IOux2fNSV2C}{}%
Ogden, Maxwell, Karissa McKelvey, and Mathias Buus Madsen. 2017. ``Dat -
Distributed Dataset Synchronization and Versioning.''
\url{https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/NSV2C}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-guardian-cup}{}%
Philips, Tom. 2017. ``Publishers Need to Stop Using Insecure Http.''
\emph{The Guardian}.
\url{https://wayback.archive.org/web/20180809112257/https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/aug/19/cambridge-university-press-accused-of-selling-its-soul-over-chinese-censorship}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.7717ux2fpeerj.4375}{}%
Piwowar, Heather, Jason Priem, Vincent Larivière, Juan Pablo Alperin,
Lisa Matthias, Bree Norlander, Ashley Farley, Jevin West, and Stefanie
Haustein. 2018. ``The State of OA: A Large-Scale Analysis of the
Prevalence and Impact of Open Access Articles.'' \emph{PeerJ} 6
(February). PeerJ:e4375. \url{https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.4375}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.3389ux2ffncom.2012.00019}{}%
Priem, Jason, and Bradley M. Hemminger. 2012. ``Decoupling the Scholarly
Journal.'' \emph{Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience} 6. Frontiers
Media SA. \url{https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2012.00019}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1045ux2fjune2001-reich}{}%
Reich, Vicky, and David S. H. Rosenthal. 2001. ``LOCKSS.'' \emph{D-Lib
Magazine} 7 (6). CNRI Acct.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1045/june2001-reich}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-roosendaal1998}{}%
Roosendaal, Hans E, and Peter A Th M Geurts. 1998. ``Forces and
Functions in Scientific Communication: An Analysis of Their Interplay.''
\url{http://web.archive.org/web/20180223112609/http://www.physik.uni-oldenburg.de/conferences/crisp97/roosendaal.html}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1038ux2fnature05008}{}%
Sompel, Herbert Van de. 2006. ``Certification in a Digital Era.''
\emph{Nature}. Springer Nature.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05008}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.1045ux2fseptember2004-vandesompel}{}%
Sompel, Herbert Van de, Sandy Payette, John Erickson, Carl Lagoze, and
Simeon Warner. 2004. ``Rethinking Scholarly Communication.'' \emph{D-Lib
Magazine} 10 (9). CNRI Acct.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1045/september2004-vandesompel}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-doi:10.2307ux2f2786545}{}%
Travers, Jeffrey, and Stanley Milgram. 1969. ``An Experimental Study of
the Small World Problem.'' \emph{Sociometry} 32 (4). JSTOR:425.
\url{https://doi.org/10.2307/2786545}.


\end{document}
